Add "A tale of broken badges and 23,000 features" blog post (#1161)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2023-10-24-broken-badges-and-23k-keywords.md

---
layout: post
title: A tale of broken badges and 23,000 features
author: Tobias Bieniek
team: the crates.io team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/crates-io>
---

> Around mid-October of 2023 we, the crates.io team, were [notified](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/issues/7269) by one of our users that a [shields.io](https://shields.io) badge for their crate stopped working. The issue reporter was kind enough to already debug the problem and figured out that the API request that shields.io sends to crates.io was most likely the problem. Here is a quote from the original issue:

Reviewer: Style nit: This seemed a little awkward to me. Perhaps something like this could smooth it:

```suggestion
Around mid-October of 2023 the crates.io team was [notified](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/issues/7269) by one of our users that a [shields.io](https://shields.io) badge for their crate stopped working. The issue reporter was kind enough to already debug the problem and figured out that the API request that shields.io sends to crates.io was most likely the problem. Here is a quote from the original issue:
```

Author: hmm, I wanted to emphasize that this is a blog post from the team, but you're right that it reads a bit clunky 😅

> > This crate makes heavy use of feature flags which bloats the response payload of the API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This crate makes heavy use of feature flags which bloat the response payload of the API.
```

Author: this is quoted from the original issue. maybe we should not modify it?

Reviewer 3: Author of the original issue here!

I don't mind if you guys modify it, english is not my first language and if you prefer correctness of language I'm totally fine with it.

> Apparently the API response for this specific crate had broken the 20 MB mark and shields.io wasn't particularly happen with this. Interestingly, this crate only had 9 versions published at this point in time. But how do you get to 20 MB with only 9 published versions?

Reviewer: Not sure if this is the word intended here? Or maybe I'm misunderstanding it.

```suggestion
Apparently the API response for this specific crate had broken the 20 MB mark and shields.io wasn't particularly happy with this. Interestingly, this crate only had 9 versions published at this point in time. But how do you get to 20 MB with only 9 published versions?
```

Author: oops, nope, that was just a typo 😅

> As the quote above already mentions, this crate is using feature… a lot of features… almost 23,000 features to be precise! 😱

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As the quote above already mentions, this crate is using features… a lot of features… almost 23,000 features to be precise! 😱
```

> As the quote above already mentions, this crate is using features… a lot of features… almost 23,000 features to be precise! 😱

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As the quote above already mentions, this crate is using features… a lot of features… almost 23,000! 😱
```

"almost 23,000" isn't really "precise!" and this lands with more "whoa" if you just finish with the number.

Optionally: "more than any other crate on crates.io, at almost 23,000 features!"

Reviewer 5: ( Also: to be clear, this is a fairly small difference, I don't have any actual issue with the verbiage and it's a purely editorial recommendation, to be accepted or dismissed as you see fit. )

Author: no worries. as a non-native speaker I'm happy to get suggestions on how to improve the text :)

> What crate needs that many features? Well, this crate provides SVG icons for Rust-based web applications… and it uses one feature per icon so that the payload size of the final WebAssembly bundle stays small.

Author: I added the ellipsis to signal a short pause there. I'd rather not remove it entirely, but I'm open replacing it with something better fitting :)

> At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo, nor crates.io, were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the implementation details are not too happy about such high numbers of features…

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo, nor crates.io, were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the internals are not too happy about such a high number of features…
```

> At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo, nor crates.io, were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the implementation details are not too happy about such high numbers of features…

Reviewer 2: Cargo is sometimes in monospaced font, but other times in "normal" font.

> At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo, nor crates.io were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the implementation details are not too happy about such high numbers of features though…

Reviewer 5: Similar "trailing text" with "though"

And one of these two are correct style, and which one you think is correct depends on which style guide you are:
```suggestion
At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo nor crates.io were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the implementation details are not too happy about such high numbers of features…
```

```suggestion
At first glance there should be nothing wrong with this. This seems like a reasonable thing to do from a crate author perspective and neither cargo, nor crates.io, were showing any warnings about this. Unfortunately, some of the implementation details are not too happy about such high numbers of features…
```

> The first problem that was already identified by the crate author: the API responses from crates.io are getting veeeery large. Adding to the problem is the fact that the crates.io API currently does not paginate the list of published versions. Changing this is obviously a breaking change, so our team had been a bit reluctant to changing the behavior of the API in that regard, though this situation has shown that we will likely have to tackle this problem in the near future.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The first problem that was already identified by the crate author: the API responses from crates.io are getting veeeery large. Adding to the problem is the fact that the crates.io API currently does not paginate the list of published versions. Changing this is obviously a breaking change, so our team had been a bit reluctant to change the behavior of the API in that regard, though this situation has shown that we will likely have to tackle this problem in the near future.
```

alternately:

```suggestion
The first problem that was already identified by the crate author: the API responses from crates.io are getting veeeery large. Adding to the problem is the fact that the crates.io API currently does not paginate the list of published versions. Changing this is obviously a breaking change, so our team had been a bit reluctant about changing the behavior of the API in that regard, though this situation has shown that we will likely have to tackle this problem in the near future.
```

> The next problem is that the [index file](https://index.crates.io/ic/on/icondata) for this crate is also getting large. With 9 published versions it was also already containing 11 MB of data. And just like the crates.io API, there is currently no pagination built into the package index file format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The next problem is that the [index file](https://index.crates.io/ic/on/icondata) for this crate is also getting large. With 9 published versions it already contains 11 MB of data. And just like the crates.io API, there is currently no pagination built into the package index file format.
```

> Now you may ask, why do the package index and `cargo` need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that `cargo` relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option.

Author: ```suggestion
Now you may ask, why do the package index and cargo need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that cargo relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option.
```

addresses https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1161#discussion_r1372924644

> Now you may ask, why does the package index and `cargo` need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all the empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that `cargo` relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you may ask, why do the package index and `cargo` need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that `cargo` relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option.
```

> Now you may ask, why do the package index and `cargo` need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all the empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that `cargo` relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option either.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now you may ask, why does the package index and `cargo` need to know about features? Well, the easy answer is: for dependency resolution. Features can enable optional dependencies, so when a dependency feature is used it might influence the dependency resolution. Our initial thought was that we could at least drop all the empty feature declarations from the index file (e.g. `foo = []`), but the cargo team informed us that `cargo` relies on them being available there too, and so for backwards-compatibility reasons this is not an option.
```

> On the bright side, most Rust users are on cargo versions these days that use the sparse package index by default, which only downloads index files for packages actually being used. In other words: only users of this icon crate need to pay the price for downloading all the metadata. On the flipside, this means users who are still using the git-based index are all paying for this one crate using 23,000 features.

Reviewer 5: It might be worth noting that this includes people using Rust + Cargo packages from older Linux distributions.

> On the bright side, most Rust users are on cargo versions these days that use the sparse package index by default, which only downloads index files for packages that are actually being used. In other words: only users of this icon crate need to pay the price for downloading all the metadata. On the flipside, this means that users who are still using the git-based index are all paying for this one crate using 23,000 features.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On the bright side, most Rust users are on cargo versions these days that use the sparse package index by default, which only downloads index files for packages actually being used. In other words: only users of this icon crate need to pay the price for downloading all the metadata. On the flipside, this means users who are still using the git-based index are all paying for this one crate using 23,000 features.
```

So, where do we go from here? 🤔

> While we believe that supporting such high numbers of features is conceptually a valid request, with the current implementation details in crates.io and cargo we can not support this. After analyzing all of these downstream effects from a single crate having that many features, we realized that we need some form of restriction on crates.io to keep the system from falling apart.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While we believe that supporting such high numbers of features is conceptually a valid request, with the current implementation details in crates.io and cargo we can not support this. After analyzing all of these downstream effects from a single crate having that many features, we realized we need some form of restriction on crates.io to keep the system from falling apart.
```

> Now comes the important part: **on 2023-10-16 the crates.io team deployed a change that limits the number of features a crate can have to 300.**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now comes the important part: **on 2023-10-16 the crates.io team deployed a change limiting the number of features a crate can have to 300.**
```
